==============
Main Inclusion
==============

Packages in the Ubuntu archive are released in one of four components: main,
restricted, universe and multiverse. Of these, most Ubuntu package maintenance
work takes place in main and universe, and the work of Canonical's staff is
focused on the main component.

All packages in main must be supported by a relevant Ubuntu development team.
We use Launchpad's "team bug subscription" feature to communicate this status.
For example, the ``apache2`` package is in main, and supported by the Ubuntu
Server Team, so in Launchpad the ``~ubuntu-server`` team has a team bug
subscription on the ``apache2`` package.

See https://wiki.ubuntu.com/MainInclusionProcess for details about main
inclusion generally in Ubuntu.

Ubuntu Server Team subscription maintenance
===========================================

On the Ubuntu Server Team, we use git to maintain the list of packages for
which we wish to indicate support through Launchpad's team bug subscription
mechanism.

The use of git, instead of just adding and removing the subscriptions in
Launchpad, allows us to:

* Avoid accidental additions and deletions.
* Maintain records about what we did and didn't support in the past.
* Note our rationale when we make changes.
* Examine the past when considering future changes.

Process for making changes to the Ubuntu Server Team package subscription list
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This process is to be used when the [main inclusion
process](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/MainInclusionProcess) calls for a package to
be subscribed by the Ubuntu Server Team.

The git repository can be found
`here <https://git.launchpad.net/~canonical-server/+git/team-subscriptions>`__.

First, prepare the change locally with a git commit that makes the change.
Include the rationale for the change in the commit message, using links to
other resources (eg. the MIR bug) as appropriate. Make sure that the commit
message only contains information that can be made public.

If the change is mechanical and uncontroversial, then go ahead and push the
change with no merge proposal required. For example, if ``php7.2`` was already
in the list and ``php8.0`` needs to be added, or if a source package has been
split into two with no other significant changes.

If the change fundamentally changes the set of packages that we support from a
user perspective, then file a merge proposal for the change, and request a
review from ``~canonical-server``.

If in doubt, please file a merge proposal anyway.

Once a change has landed into the git repository, a cron job will automatically
enact the change in Launchpad itself within 24 hours. All automated changes
made are logged to the `ubuntu-server mailing list`_

.. _ubuntu-server mailing list: https://lists.ubuntu.com/mailman/listinfo/ubuntu-server

Reviewing a merge proposal to change the set of supported packages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before the merge proposal is approved, the change should be discussed by the
Canonical Server Team. When adding packages, they must consider if they are
prepared to take on the additional work of supporting that package over many
releases and therefore many years (since main inclusion for just one release is
generally inappropriate). When removing packages, they must consider if the
loss of support from the Ubuntu Server Product is appropriate when balanced
against the burden of supporting those packages.

Further information and rationale
---------------------------------

In the future, we might be able to enrich the subscription data further, such
as to indicate specific releases that we support for particular packages. This
becomes relevant when we change support status for a package. For example,
after we have decided to stop supporting a particular package in main, moving
it to universe, we must still retain the subscription until the final release
in which the package was supported reaches EOL.

We use ``~canonical-server`` as the owner for this repository because:

* We have automation driven from the data, which means we must be able to trust
  the input.

* ``~ubuntu-server``, which would be the logical place to keep data about
  ``~ubuntu-server`` subscriptions, has an open membership policy, which means
  anybody on the Internet might be able to subvert our script if we had stored
  it there.

* Ultimately, Canonical have the authority in Ubuntu to decide what is and
  isn't in main, so restricting changes to Canonical staff makes sense.

* We don't perceive a need to restrict maintenance to only uploaders.

Note that this repository is public because the set of packages in main is
public. Rationale, however, sometimes might contain private information. For
example, we might decide to put a package into main on the basis of customer
demand, but specific customer identities should generally remain private. When
writing git commit messages, you should avoid including private information.
However, references to internal resources such as ticket numbers are acceptable
in git commit messages in this repository (unlike most other Ubuntu processes).
This is because main inclusion decisions in Ubuntu are owned and driven by
Canonical specifically, unlike most other development processes in Ubuntu.
